# 7. The Bosnian Genocide Case

Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro, Application of the Convention  on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide [2007] ICJ 2.

## Historical Background, Case Facts, and Positions of the Parties

In 1992, amid the disintegration of Yugoslavia, Serb paramilitary groups began their violence  against Bosnians, which is now known as the _Bosnian Genocide_. Ending in 1995-6 with the Dayton Accords, a Bosnian state independent from Yugoslavia was established, consisting of two federated states: the federal Bosnia and Herzegovina and the nitary Republika Srpska. The genocide was perpetrated by various paramilitary groups in the name of Bosnian Serbs with the goal of ethnically cleansing various territories so that they could later be annexed by Serbia. These are the areas that would later become the Republika Srpska (Baker, 2015).

With Serbia and Montenegro as the only Yugoslav republics not yet independent, they formed a union, which, in 2006, was brought before the ICJ by Bosnia and Herzegovina. Bosnia accused Serbia of committing genocide. However, Serbia argued that it cannot be held  responsible for the Bosnian genocide because it was committed by paramilitary groups that did  not answer directly to Serbia. This, then, was the central issue of the case: Can a State be held  liable for a genocide when it was committed by private groups that, despite financial and  logistical ties, are not working directly for it?

## Judgment and Historiography

The ICJ began by clarifying that the 1995 Srebrenica massacre  specifically constituted genocide under the Convention (para. 385). Despite this judicial confirmation that genocide was committed, genocide scholars still disagree on whether the Srebrenica massacre constituted genocide (Clearwater, 2009, pp. 40-41; Hayden, 2008). In regard to Serbia’s accountability, the Court continued by addressing various technicalities:

Firstly, the Court addressed whether Serbia can be held responsible for this act of genocide under the _Articles on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts_ (ARSIWA), written by the International Law Commission outlining the customary international legal rules for dealing with the responsibility of states, as well as forms of reparation, based upon the conduct of its state organs.  It concluded that the genocide was not perpetrated by state organs of Serbia, nor did the various military groups act under the direct instructions of Serbia. Hence, while acknowledging that Serbia financed these groups, a causal link was not sufficiently strong to incur liability (para. 394).

Secondly, the Court considered whether Serbia could be complicit in the genocide on the basis of direction or control. This would mean that Serbia was involved more passively than in the first consideration. Here, the Court found insufficient evidence to suggest that the perpetrators of the genocide – various paramilitary groups associated with the Republika Srpska – informed Serbia specifically of their intention to commit genocide, informing them only about the military activities in the area (para. 412).

Finally, the Court considered whether Serbia fulfilled its duties regarding the prevention of genocide and the punishment of suspected perpetrators. Here, the Court established an important legal rule; namely, that all states have the responsibility, at all times and by all means available, without having to succeed, to make an attempt at preventing genocide. It also states that the risk of genocide is enough to trigger this obligation; genocide does not have to be factually established. The Court ruled in favor of Bosnia here, ruling that Serbia had enough influence over the Republika Srpska – and enough information to assess the risk of genocide – to stop it from occurring (para. 450).

With regard to the punishment of genocidaires, the Court again ruled that Serbia failed its obligations, as it did not cooperate sufficiently with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), established under the Dayton Accords to punish the perpetrators of internationally wrongful acts committed during the Yugoslav wars. Hence, Serbia’s state responsibility was invoked under this third and final point (para. 449). Bosnia was granted the symbolic compensation that they demanded; Serbia had to publicly declare that it would comply with the ICTY (para. 464). Hence, Serbia had not committed genocide, but had failed at its duties to prevent it and punish those who committed it.

The Bosnian Genocide case illustrates that genocide prevention is an act that must be observed at all times by all states. The case remains relevant today and could be used in cases such as _South Africa v. Israel_  and by local parliaments as a vessel for the reconsideration of foreign policy. The case is seminal when it comes to defining genocide (Clearwater, 2009) and handling the fragmentation of international law when handled by more than one court (in this case the ICTY) (Goldstone & Hamilton, 2008, p. 111). Most important are the developments in the rules of attribution (Griebel & Plücken, 2008). Even so, some scholars considered the case disappointing, as it brought the parties further away from one another (Palassis, 2008, p. 106)
